docs: document KQL and natural language query drafting in the ES|QL editor (#6350) (#6692)
elastic/docs-content: explore-analyze/query-filter/languages/esql-kibana.md

| {kbd}`cmd+enter`   | {kbd}`ctrl+enter`   | Run a query                 |
| {kbd}`cmd+/`       | {kbd}`ctrl+/`       | Comment or uncomment the current line or selected lines |
| {kbd}`cmd+i`       | {kbd}`ctrl+i`       | [Prettify query](#_make_your_query_readable) {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.4+` |

> | {kbd}`cmd+k`       | {kbd}`ctrl+k`       | Open the [search bar](#esql-kibana-search-bar) |

Author: ```suggestion
| {kbd}`cmd+k`       | {kbd}`ctrl+k`       | Open the [search bar](#esql-kibana-quick-search) |
```

:::{tip}
You can find the list of shortcuts directly from the editor. Look for the ![keyboard](../../images/keyboard.svg "keyboard =2%") icon.
:::

> ### Draft queries with KQL or natural language [esql-kibana-search-bar]

Author: ```suggestion
### Create queries from KQL or natural language [esql-kibana-search-bar]
```

> ### Create queries from KQL or natural language [esql-kibana-search-bar]

Author: ```suggestion
### Create queries from KQL or natural language [esql-kibana-quick-search]
```

```{applies_to}
serverless: preview
stack: preview 9.3+
```

> The {{esql}} editor includes a search bar that helps you write a query without writing the full {{esql}} syntax. To open it, select the {icon}`magnify` search icon in the editor's toolbar, or press {kbd}`cmd+k` (Mac) or {kbd}`ctrl+k` (Windows/Linux). You can then get a query using:

Author: ```suggestion
The {{esql}} editor includes a search bar that helps you get a query without writing the full {{esql}} syntax. To open it, select the {icon}`magnify` search icon in the editor's toolbar, or press {kbd}`cmd+k` (Mac) or {kbd}`ctrl+k` (Windows/Linux). You can then get a query using:
```

> The {{esql}} editor includes a search bar that helps you draft a query without writing the full {{esql}} syntax. To open it, select the {icon}`magnify` search icon in the editor's toolbar, or press {kbd}`cmd+k` (Mac) or {kbd}`ctrl+k` (Windows/Linux). You can then draft a query using:

Author: ```suggestion
The {{esql}} editor includes a search bar that helps you write a query without writing the full {{esql}} syntax. To open it, select the {icon}`magnify` search icon in the editor's toolbar, or press {kbd}`cmd+k` (Mac) or {kbd}`ctrl+k` (Windows/Linux). You can then draft a query using:
```

> The {{esql}} editor includes a search bar that helps you write a query without writing the full {{esql}} syntax. To open it, select the {icon}`magnify` search icon in the editor's toolbar, or press {kbd}`cmd+k` (Mac) or {kbd}`ctrl+k` (Windows/Linux). You can then draft a query using:

Author: ```suggestion
The {{esql}} editor includes a search bar that helps you write a query without writing the full {{esql}} syntax. To open it, select the {icon}`magnify` search icon in the editor's toolbar, or press {kbd}`cmd+k` (Mac) or {kbd}`ctrl+k` (Windows/Linux). You can then get a query using:
```

> The {{esql}} editor includes a search bar that helps you get a query without writing the full {{esql}} syntax. To open it, select the {icon}`magnify` search icon in the editor's toolbar, or press {kbd}`cmd+k` (Mac) or {kbd}`ctrl+k` (Windows/Linux). You can then get a query using:

Author: ```suggestion
The {{esql}} editor includes a search bar that helps you get a query without writing the full {{esql}} syntax. To open it, select the {icon}`magnify` or {icon}`magnify_sparkles` search icon in the editor's toolbar, or press {kbd}`cmd+k` (Mac) or {kbd}`ctrl+k` (Windows/Linux). You can then get a query using:
```

- **KQL**: filter your data with free-text or [KQL](kql.md) syntax.

> - {applies_to}`stack: preview 9.5+` {applies_to}`serverless: preview` **Natural language**: describe the query you want in plain language and let an LLM generate it for you. Requires an Enterprise license and a configured LLM connector.

Reviewer: Correct!

> In either case, the editor replaces the current query with a generated {{esql}} query and runs it. The new query is saved to your [query history](#esql-kibana-query-history) so you can restore it later.

Author: ```suggestion
In either case, the editor updates the current query with a generated {{esql}} query and runs it. The new query is saved to your [query history](#esql-kibana-query-history) so you can restore it later.
```

The search bar closes automatically when you start typing in the editor or select outside of it.

#### Filter your data with KQL

> 1. Open the search bar.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Open the editor's search bar ({icon}`magnify` or {icon}`magnify_sparkles`).
```

2. Select the data sources to search.
3. Type the text you want to search for as free text or using [KQL](kql.md) syntax.

> 4. Submit your search by pressing **Enter**. The generated query includes a `FROM` command based on the data sources you selected (or `TS` if the data source is a time series data stream), and a `WHERE KQL()` command that contains the text you typed in the search bar.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Submit your search by pressing {kbd}`enter`. The generated query includes a `FROM` command based on the data sources you selected (or `TS` if the data source is a time series data stream), and a `WHERE KQL()` command that contains the text you typed in the search bar.
```

<kbd>Enter</kbd> 😄

5. Refine your query with any other {{esql}} command or function that you need.

![Search bar in the ES|QL editor](https://images.contentstack.io/v3/assets/bltefdd0b53724fa2ce/bltc3b8614d0ecabbd9/69ebb647065c54efe579b251/esql-quick-search-kql.gif "=60%")

#### Generate a query from natural language [esql-kibana-quick-search-nl]
```{applies_to}
stack: preview 9.5+
serverless: preview
```

You can describe the query you want in plain language and let an LLM translate it into {{esql}}. This is useful when you know what you want to ask of your data but are not sure which {{esql}} commands or functions to use.

**Requirements**

> - An Enterprise license.

Reviewer 2: are we doing this nowadays?

Author: You still get a button but that doesn't offer that option if you don't have that license so better list it

Author: ```suggestion
- For {{ech}}, {{ece}}, and {{eck}} deployments or self-managed clusters, you need an Enterprise license .
```
looks like it's for any serverless tier so adding nuance here

> - A configured LLM connector. Refer to [Configure access to LLMs](/explore-analyze/ai-features/llm-guides/llm-connectors.md). If no connector is available, the search bar prompts you to set one up.

Author: I need to figure out where's the best place to link to, not sure this is the one

Author: Looks ok ✅

> When natural language is available, the search icon in the toolbar changes to {icon}`magnify_sparkles` and its tooltip reads `Search your data using KQL or natural language`.

Author: ```suggestion
```

**Generate a query**

> 1. Open the editor's search bar ({icon}`magnify_sparkles`).

Reviewer: They can also use the comments inside the editor but I am assuming we are going to write about it in a follow up Florent?

Author: Yes I have this https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/issues/6552 to build on top of that, and https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/issues/6681

> 1. Open the search bar.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Open the editor's {icon}`magnify_sparkles` search bar.
```

> 1. Open the editor's {icon}`magnify_sparkles` search bar.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Open the editor's search bar ({icon}`magnify_sparkles`).
```

2. From the mode selector, select **Natural language**.
3. In the input, describe the query you want. For example, `Show the average response time per host for the last 24 hours`.

> 4. Submit your request by pressing **Enter**. The editor replaces the current query with the generated {{esql}} query and runs it.

Author: ```suggestion
4. Submit your request by pressing **Enter**. The editor replaces or updates the current query and runs it.
```

> 5. Review the generated query and refine it with any other {{esql}} command or function that you need.

Author: ```suggestion
5. Review the generated query and refine it with any other {{esql}} command or function that you need, or by continuing to use natural language through the search bar.
```
